## Fabula and Sjužet

<p class="lead">“Fabula” and “sjužet” are two words that have entered into
narrative theory via Russian Formalism. Both “фабула” and “сюжет” can mean
“plot,” but early 20th century Russian critics narrowed their definitions.
Fabula, in its most basic sense, is the historical order of the events in a
story. Sjužet (from the French “sujet”) is the narrative order of the
story.</p>

Very simplistically, in _Ulysses_, episode 3 (“Proteus”) is _after_ episode 4
(“Calypso”) in the novel’s fabula, as the events in the former take place
starting at 11:00 on Bloomsday, while the events in the latter cover
8:00–10:00. However, “Proteus” is _before_ “Calypso” in the sjužet, as it is
the third episode, and “Calypso” is the fourth. Reading _Ulysses_’s fabula
would force reading episode 4 before episode 3. Reading its sjužet reverses the
process.

Adding complication, Viktor Shklovsky builds on this distinction to demonstrate
how the aesthetic emerges from the material.

>The concept of plot (_syuzhet_) is too often confused with a description of
>the events in the novel, with what I’d tentatively call the story line
>(_fabula_).

>As a matter of fact, though, the story line is nothing more than material for
>plot formation [сюжетного оформления].

The fabula is the foundation, the “real world” of the novel that is then bent
and twisted into the sjužet, which carries the artistic charge. As Shklovsky continues,

>The forms of art are explained by the artistic laws that govern them and not
>by comparisons with actual life. In order to impede the action of the novel,
>the artist resorts not to witches and magic potions but to a simple
>transposition of its parts. He thereby reveals to us the aesthetic laws that
>underlie both of these compositional devices.

This fundamental requirement of transposition is prompted by Shklovsky’s
remarking on Tristram Shandy’s own discussion of his digressions at the end of
volume VI of his novel. Shandy [draws a set of
lines](https://books.google.com/books?id=7UIVAAAAQAAJ&dq=tristram%20shandy&pg=RA1-PA152#v=onepage&q&f=false)
to describe his “digressions,” aiming eventually to produce a straight line,
“the best line.” But these digressions, this manipulation of the material of
the fabula, is what prompts Shklovsky to call _Tristram Shandy_ “the most
typical novel in world literature” (170).

The fabula (raw material) and sjužet (manipulated material) generate
contrasting and perhaps contradictory temporalities (or, better,
spatiotemporalities) that separate the novel from the world that the novel
creates.  When discussing story/discourse, histoire/discours, and
fabula/sjužet, Alex Woloch reiterates this point by adding that

>All these dichotomous terms refer, finally, to the essentially divided nature
>of the literary text, as it is torn between form and content; between the
>signified and the signifier; between the text’s linguistic world—words,
>sentences, chapters—and the imagined world that we grasp at through the text.
>Discourse [sjužet] points us to the narrative’s actual language and structure;
>story [fabula] to the fictional events that we reconstruct through the
>narrative (38).

The world generated by the novel has a spacetime that interacts with the
aesthetic means by which the world is uncovered in the plot. The elements of
the fabula are abstracted out and exist in a spatiotemporality we could call
“geohistory,” one where time moves only in one direction. Hence the fabula of
the Dublin created in “Wandering Rocks” could actually begin with the 8th Earl
of Kildare, whose late 15th century rule of Ireland comes up in conversation
between Lambert and O’Molloy, as those acts are a cause whose effect (the
conversation), bubbles up on Bloomsday. For the purposes of this visualization,
however, the timeline of the fabula marches in its solitary direction from 14:55
to 15:58 on 16 June 1904.

The elements of the fabula, however, provide the foundation for the sjužet.
Here, the building blocks of the novel world’s geohistory are recombined with
aesthetics in mind. Within the sjužet, the fabula is reordered, and the
timeline is no longer a persistent march forward. 

Though _Ulysses_ moves linearly for the most part (save the clock’s resetting
at the beginning of “Calypso” as noted above), in “Wandering Rocks,” it’s clear
how different fabula and sjužet can be. Because of Joyce’s meticulous design
for the chapter, we can see it as a network of crisscrossing timelines. The
first moment in the episode is the same in both fabula and sjužet; Conmee
checks his watch. Similarly, the last is the same in both as well; Artifoni
finally catches a Dalkey tram just as the viceregal cavalcade passes him by.
But these events bookend something that jumps back and forth, underscoring the
different modes of spatiotemporality offered by fabula and sjužet. Yet because
of the necessary temporal component of spatiotemporality, it doesn’t suffice to
think of “Wandering Rocks” with a fixed map showing everyone’s journeys. The
information is incomplete.

Furthermore, “Wandering Rocks”’s focus on minor characters also highlights the
tension between the world of the novel (where the fabula is) and its art (where
the sjužet is). The episode takes the reader out of the frame of _The Odyssey_,
of the story of Stephen and Bloom. Instead, it showcases Dublin and its
inhabitants, a side story populated by masses of minor characters not typically
given the space to breathe in a novel. 
