markdown/okso.md, before:

## This Is Great and All, but So What?

>My task is to move, to shift systems (Barthes 10)

This is the hardest tab to write. Building this visualization
involves (involved) giving in to tendencies that I am trying to avoid in my
scholarship. Given that one of the goals was to learn the underlying
technology, however, it could not have been otherwise.

The issue is that animations provided by the JavaScript driving this project,
while super neat and cool, possibly do not actually tell us much _about_
“Wandering Rocks.” This initial concern is amplified by the following
reactions.

* **Oh, just what the world needs, another deep dive on James Freakin’ Joyce.**
There are lots of novels with fractured fabuly and sjužety (if we’re sticking
to the Russian…). Similarly, there are lots of novels that provide extensive
geographical detail, making mapping movements through a city possible. Why go
back to such a canonical novel like _Ulysses_? Well, its very canonicity means
that _a lot of the work has already been done_. Most of the geocoding for this
section was just double-checking the work already done by Gifford and Gunn and
Hart. Additionally, the timings would have been impossible for me to include
without Hart’s own walking around in Dublin pretending to be an old woman or
onelegged sailor, stopwatch in hand. I aim to make my spatiotemporal
investigations of novels move past just the obvious hits like The Novel of High
Modernism, but sometimes it’s worthwhile to build on a strong, already existing
foundation. For example, the geographical “blunders” in the episode have
already been dissected by generations of Joyce scholars, meaning when I
stumbled upon them independent, I could rely on those scholars’ expertise and
either accept or reject it. Finally, its canonicity helps with its profile.  I
think the ideas and troubles hinted at in how I talk about this project can
help frame how we look at spatiotemoporality for any novel (or perhaps
aesthetic text), but since a lot of people care about Joyce, maybe this will
give those ideas more visibility.

* **Friend, _Ulysses_ takes place in Dublin in 1904. You have a 2017
basemap.** This is a valid concern, and it is one that merely putting a c.
1904 georectified basemap underneath the dots and lines would not really solve.
Drucker has been encouraging data-handling humanists to consider the value of
georectification, as doing so merely “reconciles spatial data and maps… with a
given standard, such as Google maps”(76–77). Georectification is the imposition
of a specific, GIS kind of thinking on data (or “capta,” to use Drucker’s term)
that does not exist with GIS in mind. As Drucker continues, “the greater
intellectual challenge is to create spatial representations without referencing
a pre-existing ground”(77). The information in _Ulysses_ takes a troubling trip
to your computer screen: I _capture_ it and identify it as a datum (or captum).
I then spatiotemporally locate it through consulting some combination of
Gifford, Gunn and Hart, Wikipedia, and Google. Following a conversion, perhaps
with Google’s help, to Cartesian coordinates based on a measurement of the
Earth’s shape from 1984, I line those coordinates up with a contemporary
map of Dublin, making the risky guess that, as far as downtown is concerned,
streets have not changed their shape all that much. Then Leaflet and D3, two
software packages, combine to recalculate those coordinates into the little
exploding dots you see. Every step adds new assumptions about how space and
time work and move the capta farther from its source.  Furthermore, as soon as
the jump is made to the digital, a faux-precision dominates, where, for
example, something like the immense idea of “America” is reduced to a teeny
exploding dot with its center in Kansas. These issues remain _unsolved_, and
this project _fails_ Drucker’s challenge.

* **You took preëxisting information and just added color and made it bounce.**
Drucker distinguishes between information visualizations that produce the
knowledge they draw and those that merely display information (3). It
seems inarguable that this visualization does the latter only. Any new insights
into “Wandering Rocks” seem destined for the bin marked “merely interesting”
(Ngai). As in, “isn’t it _interesting_ that Boylan’s section is the first
to intrude on Conmee’s command of the fabula from the of the episode?” That is,
perhaps, interesting. It also may just be a cool story, bro. Moving that
glimmer of interestingness somewhere else requires a deeper look into the
structure of the episode, a look simply unavailable to this visualization. I
have an idea for a different form of visualizing the tension between fabula and
sjužet (hint: a two-dimentional (time|plot)line), but that visualization would
be exclusively temporal, thereby violating the canonical rule of spatiotemporal
thinking, in a Bill Murray singing voice: “Spacetime, nothing but spacetime.”
Fabula and sjužet seem to be strictly temporal terms, and it’s all too easy to
treat them exclusively as such. But, then, that’s what we’re doing: taking the
all too easy route.

* **All this, just to have a chance to play with JavaScript?** Play!

Commit message:

Update README and close out okso for now.

markdown/okso.md, after:

## This Is Great and All, but So What?

>My task is to move, to shift systems (Barthes 10)

This is the hardest tab to write. Building this visualization
involves (involved) giving in to tendencies that I am trying to avoid in my
scholarship. Given that one of the goals was to learn the underlying
technology, however, it could not have been otherwise.

The issue is that animations provided by the JavaScript driving this project,
while super neat and cool, possibly do not actually tell us much _about_
“Wandering Rocks.” This initial concern is amplified by the following
reactions.

**Oh, just what the world needs, another deep dive on James Freakin’ Joyce.**
There are lots of novels with fractured fabuly and sjužety (if we’re sticking
to the Russian…). Similarly, there are lots of novels that provide extensive
geographical detail, making mapping movements through a city possible. Why go
back to such a canonical novel like _Ulysses_? Well, its very canonicity means
that _a lot of the work has already been done_. Most of the geocoding for this
section was just double-checking the work already done by Gifford and Gunn and
Hart. Additionally, the timings would have been impossible for me to include
without Hart’s own walking around in Dublin pretending to be an old woman or
onelegged sailor, stopwatch in hand. I aim to make my spatiotemporal
investigations of novels move past just the obvious hits like The Novel of High
Modernism, but sometimes it’s worthwhile to build on a strong, already existing
foundation. For example, the geographical “blunders” in the episode have
already been dissected by generations of Joyce scholars, meaning when I
stumbled upon them independent, I could rely on those scholars’ expertise and
either accept or reject it. Finally, its canonicity helps with its profile.  I
think the ideas and troubles hinted at in how I talk about this project can
help frame how we look at spatiotemoporality for any novel (or perhaps
aesthetic text), but since a lot of people care about Joyce, maybe this will
give those ideas more visibility.

**Friend, _Ulysses_ takes place in Dublin in 1904. You have a 2017
basemap.** This is a valid concern, and it is one that merely putting a c.
1904 georectified basemap underneath the dots and lines would not really solve.
Drucker has been encouraging data-handling humanists to consider the value of
georectification, as doing so merely “reconciles spatial data and maps… with a
given standard, such as Google maps”(76–77). Georectification is the imposition
of a specific, GIS kind of thinking on data (or “capta,” to use Drucker’s term)
that does not exist with GIS in mind. As Drucker continues, “the greater
intellectual challenge is to create spatial representations without referencing
a pre-existing ground”(77). The information in _Ulysses_ takes a troubling trip
to your computer screen: I _capture_ it and identify it as a datum (or captum).
I then spatiotemporally locate it through consulting some combination of
Gifford, Gunn and Hart, Wikipedia, and Google. Following a conversion, perhaps
with Google’s help, to Cartesian coordinates based on a measurement of the
Earth’s shape from 1984, I line those coordinates up with a contemporary
map of Dublin, making the risky guess that, as far as downtown is concerned,
streets have not changed their shape all that much. Then Leaflet and D3, two
software packages, combine to recalculate those coordinates into the little
exploding dots you see. Every step adds new assumptions about how space and
time work and move the capta farther from its source.  Furthermore, as soon as
the jump is made to the digital, a faux-precision dominates, where, for
example, something like the immense idea of “America” is reduced to a teeny
exploding dot with its center in Kansas. These issues remain _unsolved_, and
this project _fails_ Drucker’s challenge.

**You took preëxisting information and just added color and made it bounce.**
Drucker distinguishes between information visualizations that produce the
knowledge they draw and those that merely display information (3). It
seems inarguable that this visualization does the latter only. Any new insights
into “Wandering Rocks” seem destined for the bin marked “merely interesting”
(Ngai). As in, “isn’t it _interesting_ that Boylan’s section is the first
to intrude on Conmee’s command of the fabula from the of the episode?” That is,
perhaps, interesting. It also may just be a cool story, bro. Moving that
glimmer of interestingness somewhere else requires a deeper look into the
structure of the episode, a look simply unavailable to this visualization. I
have an idea for a different form of visualizing the tension between fabula and
sjužet (hint: a two-dimentional (time|plot)line), but that visualization would
be exclusively temporal, thereby violating the canonical rule of spatiotemporal
thinking, in a Bill Murray singing voice: “Spacetime, nothing but spacetime.”
Fabula and sjužet seem to be strictly temporal terms, and it’s all too easy to
treat them exclusively as such. But, then, that’s what we’re doing: taking the
all too easy route.

**All this, just to have a chance to play with JavaScript?** Play! Isn’t that the point? Barthes again, and to close out:

> Rereading draws the text out of its internal chronology (“this happens
> _before_ or _after_ that”) and recaptures a mythic time (without _before_ or
> _after_ [hence troubling Andersonian simultaneity]); rereading is no longer
> consumption, but play (that play which is the return of the different). If
> then, a deliberate contradiction in terms, we _immediately_ reread the text,
> it is in order to obstain, as though under the effect of a drug (that of
> recommencement, of different), not the _real_ text, but a plural text: the
> same and new (16)
